docs: Hilla file-based router usage (#3288)
vaadin/docs: articles/hilla/guides/routing.adoc

order: 60
---

= [since:com.vaadin:vaadin@v24.4]#File-Based Routing#

Since Vaadin 24.4, Hilla React applications are using the file router. This documentation can guide you through the basics of using routing in your application.

== Adding Routes

> The file router is using the `.tsx` files in the `src/main/frontend/views/` directory and its subdirectories as routes.

Reviewer: Is it only `.tsx` files or `.jsx` files are also included?

== Adding Routes with Parameters

Sometimes, you may need to create routes that accept dynamic parameters, such as product IDs or names. This can be done by using the `{parameterName}` filename convention. For example, create the file named `{productId}.tsx` in the `src/main/frontend/views/products/` directory with the following content:

[source,tsx]
----
import { useParams } from 'react-router-dom';

export default function ProductView() {
  const { productId } = useParams();

  // Fetch product details for the given ID
  const product = useSignal<Product | undefined>(undefined);

  useEffect(() => {
    ProductEndpoint.getProduct(productId).then(p => product.value = p);
  }, [productId]);}
----

This creates the route with the path `/products/{productId}`, where `{productId}` acts as a placeholder for the actual product ID. To access the route parameter in the view, use the `useParams` hook from `react-router-dom` in your component, as shown in the example above. The view component fetches product data for the product ID in the route.

To link to this route with a specific `productId`, you can use the `to` property of `NavLink` like this:

[source,tsx]
----

> <NavLink to="/products/123">Show product details</NavLink>

Author: Let's omit the parameter combinations, they are not supported at the moment.

I've mentioned the convention for optional parameters. The usage, apart from the naming convention, is exactly the same as with required parameters, so another example does not bring much value IMO.

order: 60
---

= [since:com.vaadin:vaadin@v24.4]#File-Based Routing#

Since Vaadin 24.4, Hilla React applications are using the file router. This documentation can guide you through the basics of using routing in your application.

== Adding Routes

> The file router is using the `.tsx` files in the `frontend/views/` directory and its subdirectories as routes.

Reviewer 2: Should be replaced by `src/main/frontend/views/`, or noted that frontend means folder inside `src/main/`.

Reviewer 2: Same for other mentions of frontend path.

          </nav>
        </header>
      </div>

      <DrawerToggle slot="navbar" aria-label="Menu toggle"></DrawerToggle>

      <Suspense fallback={<ProgressBar indeterminate={true} className="m-0" />}>
        <Outlet />
      </Suspense>
    </AppLayout>
  );
}
----

== Creating Menu From Routes

The structure of application routes is naturally closely related with navigation menus. The main menu often directly lists the same items as the routes define, thus it could be created from the routes.

Hilla file router offers the `createMenuItems()` utility function to simplify populating the menu using routes data.

The following example demonstrates creating the main menu `createMenuItems()`:

[source,tsx]
----
import { createMenuItems } from '@vaadin/hilla-file-router/runtime.js';
import { NavLink } from 'react-router-dom';

const navLinkClasses = ({ isActive }: any) => {
  return `block rounded-m p-s ${isActive ? 'bg-primary-10 text-primary' : 'text-body'}`;
};

export default function MainMenu() {
  return (
    {createMenuItems().map(({ to, icon, title }) => (
      <NavLink className={navLinkClasses} to={to} key={to}>
        {title}
      </NavLink>
    ))}

>   );

Reviewer 3: We should recommend our Side Nav component instead of NavLink for creating your main menu, using the `onNavigate` and `location`. E.g.

```tsx
const navigate = useNavigate();
const location = useLocation();

return <SideNav onNavigate={({ path }) => path && navigate(path)} location={location}>
  {createMenuItems().map(({ to, icon, title }) => (
    <SideNavItem path={to} key={to}>
      <Icon icon={icon} slot="prefix"/>
      {title}
    </SideNavItem>
  )}
</SideNav>
```

= Routing

> Hilla React applications are using a file-system based router, which is built on top of https://reactrouter.com/en/main[React Router], a popular routing library for React applications. This documentation can guide you through the basics of using routing in your application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Hilla React applications are using a filesystem-based router, which is built on top of https://reactrouter.com/[React Router], a popular routing library for React applications. This documentation can guide you through the basics of using routing in your application.
```
Or "file-system-based". See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_system, both alternatives are possible, but for sure you need a hyphen before "based".

Concerning the URL, why point to a specific page? That could change in future.

The following example defines the main layout with the drawer and the main menu:

[source,tsx]
----
import { AppLayout } from '@vaadin/react-components/AppLayout.js';
import { DrawerToggle } from '@vaadin/react-components/DrawerToggle.js';
import Placeholder from 'Frontend/components/placeholder/Placeholder.js';
import { Suspense, useEffect } from 'react';
import { NavLink, Outlet } from 'react-router-dom';

export default function MainLayout() {

  return (
    <AppLayout primarySection="drawer">
      <div slot="drawer" className="flex flex-col justify-between h-full p-m">
        <header className="flex flex-col gap-m">
          <h1 className="text-l m-0">My application</h1>
          <nav>
            <NavLink to="/example">Example</NavLink>
          </nav>
        </header>
      </div>

      <DrawerToggle slot="navbar" aria-label="Menu toggle"></DrawerToggle>

      <Suspense fallback={<Placeholder />}>
        <Outlet />
      </Suspense>
    </AppLayout>
  );
}
----

== Creating Menu From Routes

> The structure of application routes is naturally closely related with navigation menus. The main menu is often directly lists the same items as the routes define, thus it could be created from the routes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The structure of application routes is naturally closely related with navigation menus. The main menu often directly lists the same items as the routes define, thus it could be created from the routes.
```

[source,tsx]
----
import { createMenuItems } from '@vaadin/hilla-file-router/runtime.js';
import { NavLink } from 'react-router-dom';

const navLinkClasses = ({ isActive }: any) => {
  return `block rounded-m p-s ${isActive ? 'bg-primary-10 text-primary' : 'text-body'}`;
};

export default function MainMenu() {
  return (
    {createMenuItems().map(({ to, icon, title }) => (
      <NavLink className={navLinkClasses} to={to} key={to}>
        {title}
      </NavLink>
    ))}
  );
}
----

== Customizing Route Configuration

In some cases, you may want to customize the configuration of a route on top of what is inferred from the file. By customizing a route you can, for example, set a page title, a menu link title and icon, or override the route path.

To customize the route to a route, in your view `.tsx` file, export an object named `config` of `ViewConfig` type:

[source,tsx]
.`frontend/views/about.tsx`
----
import { ViewConfig } from "@vaadin/hilla-file-router/types.js";

export default fuction AboutView() {
  return (
    /* ... */
  );
}

export const config: ViewConfig = {
  title: "About Us",
};
----

> In this example, a page title is added to the example route.

Reviewer 4: The example is a bit confusing since it actually uses the title in the body and also deals with the page title. I'd remove the code that sets the page title.

const metadata = useRouteMetadata();
const title = metadata.title ?? "My App";
----
====

=== Route Config Reference

Here are the options currently supported in the `config` object:

`title: string`::
  View title for use in the main layout header, in the browser window `document.title`, and as the default for the menu entry. If not defined, the component name will be taken, transformed from camelCase.
`rolesAllowed: readonly string[]`::
  For applications using authentication, the array of user roles that are allowed to access the view.

`route: string`::
  Overrides the route path configuration. Uses the same syntax as the `path` property with React Router.

`menu: object`::
  The menu item metadata object with the following options:

  `title: string`:::
    Title to use in the menu item.

  `icon?: string;`:::
    Icon to use in the menu.

  `order: number`:::
    The number used to determine the order in the menu. Ties are resolved based on the used title. Entries without explicitly defined ordering are put below entries with an order.

  `exclude: boolean`:::
    Set to true to explicitly exclude a view from the automatically populated menu.

> 

Reviewer 3: Missing the `loginRequired` option.

const title = metadata.title ?? "My App";
----
====

=== Route Config Reference

Here are the options currently supported in the `config` object:

`title: string`::
  View title for use in the main layout header, in the browser window `document.title`, and as the default for the menu entry. If not defined, the component name will be taken, transformed from camelCase.

`route: string`::
Overrides the route path configuration. Uses the same syntax as the `path` property with React Router.

`loginRequired: boolean`::
For applications using authentication, requires user authentication for accessing the view.

`rolesAllowed: readonly string[]`::
  For applications using authentication, the array of user roles that are allowed to access the view.

`menu: object`::
  The menu item metadata object with the following options:

  `title: string`:::
    Title to use in the menu item.

  `icon?: string;`:::
    Icon to use in the menu.

  `order: number`:::
    The number used to determine the order in the menu. Ties are resolved based on the used title. Entries without explicitly defined ordering are put below entries with an order.

  `exclude: boolean`:::

>     Set to true to explicitly exclude a view from the automatically populated menu.

Reviewer: Here, we could either exclude all the `?` or have the for all the nullable properties.
